---
layout: post
author: ulysses
---
## Why should we use version control systems?

Commonly, prior to using a version control system, we would use some form of
file naming system to let us know which version a file belongs to, and which
file is the latest and most updated file we have.

Imagine that you were working on a project and had some code that you are
working on for submission. It could look like:

```
projects
|
+- IT5007_homework_one
   |
   + working_version1.js
   + working_version2.js
   + final_version.js
```

This allows for some form of record history to let you know which files came
first and so on, but if you were to want to know quickly what differences
exist between `working_version2.js` and `final_version.js`? Additionally, this
file naming system would be a standard that you would have to share with anyone
you are working with. (What if they too had their own `final_version.js`).

Git solves these problems by providing a standard for version control with
functionality to save a history of snapshots for projects and other useful
metadata.

Perhaps, you were looking at two previous snapshots, one where you saved the
version of code that was `working_version2.js` and one that was
`final_version.js`. With Git, you could check the commit message for these
snapshots and get a quick overview of why certain parts of your code was changed
and for what reason. (Well, we assume that you write good commit messages! 😎)

Another example of Git's functionality that cannot be easily replicated by the
above file naming system is the ability to create **branches** that allow
separate lines of development to occur in parallel. For example, you discovered
a bug fix, and concurrently, your co-worker would like to develop a new feature.
Both of you could branch of the current snapshot and then merge your branches
back in later.

## How Git's data model works

Before we look into the functional interface of Git, it's important to first
layout the data model of Git and how snapshots are created and stored.

Some terminology:
- "blob" -> a common term for a file (or a bunch of bytes)
- "tree" -> a directory (or folder)
- "snapshot" -> the top level tree that is being tracked by Git

### Example (taken from [missing_semester](https://missing.csail.mit.edu/2020/version-control/)):
```
<root> (tree)
|
+- foo (tree)
|  |
|  + bar.txt (blob, contents = "hello world")
|
+- baz.txt (blob, contents = "git is wonderful")
```

In this example, we have a top-level tree that contains two elements, a tree
(foo) and a blob (baz.txt).

### Snapshots
Git's data model records snapshots in the form of a directed acyclic graph (DAG).
What this means is that each snapshot has a set of snapshots that precede it,
i.e. a set of parent nodes. Since it is not necessarily a linear history, there
exists a possibility that a snapshot could have been created as the child of two
different parent snapshots (this occurs when merging two parallel branches of
development).

```
o <-- o <-- o
      ^
       \
        --- o <-- o
```

In this graph, the `<--` defines a **comes-before** relation, where the `o`
being pointed to by the arrow indicates the parent node, and the node on the
right of the arrow indicates the child node. As such, what the above graph
depicts is a history of snapshots that branched into two separate branches after
the second commit.

Once these two branches of development are to be linked back together, they may
be merged back together, resulting in a graph that looks like this:

```
o <-- o <-- o <---- o
      ^            /
       \          v
        --- o <-- o
```

### Pseudocode for Git's data model
Adapted from [missing_semester](https://missing.csail.mit.edu/2020/version-control/)

At this point, we have a rough idea of what snapshots a.k.a. commits are in Git
and how branches can be created and then merged together. We now look at the
data stored by Git and what a rough model of it looks like!

```
// a file is a bunch of bytes
type blob = array<byte>

// a directory contains named files and directories
type tree = map<string, tree | blob>

// a commit has parents, metadata, and the top-level tree
type commit = struct {
    parents: array<commit>
    author: string
    message: string
    snapshot: tree
}
```

As previously defined:
- A `blob` is essentially a bunch of bytes, and hence, can be stored as an array
of bytes.
- A `tree` can be thought of as a set of mappings from `strings` to `tree`s or
`blob`s.
- For a commit, it would then have a set of parents, which can be stored as an
`array` of commits; an author, a message, and the reference to the top level
tree that is being tracked by Git.

**How does Git then store this data within its data store?**

```
type object = blob | tree | commit
```

In Git, an object is either a blob, a tree, or a commit. Git then addresses these
objects by their SHA-1 hash. Each SHA-1 hash references some object within the
Git directory. You can think of this as a hashmap where the keys are the SHA-1
hash of each object, and the value as the object itself.

The overarching idea here is that when we use some git commands to manipulate
our repository, we are interacting with this data model that Git uses to store
its data.

## Git Commands

- `git init`: initializes an empty Git repository
- `git add <filename>`: adds files to the staging area
- `git commit`: creates a new commit with a commit message
- `git log`: shows the history of Git commits
- `git diff`: shows changes you made (compared to the staging area)
- `git checkout <branch>`: updates HEAD and the current working branch
- `git branch`: shows branches
- `git branch <name>`: creates a branch with the specified name
- `git checkout -b <branchname>`: creates a branch with the specified branchname
and updates HEAD and the current working branch to the specified branchname

Note: `HEAD` points to where you currently are at in the Git repository.

## Git Remotes
- `git init --bare`: makes the folder appropriate to use as git remote
- `git remote add <name> <url>`: add a remote
- `git push <remote> <local branch>:<remote branch>`: send objects to remote and
update the remote reference (creates/updates the name of the remote branch on
the remote with the contents of the local branch)
- `git clone <url> <folder name>`: downloads the Git repository from the remote
into a folder (named by the folder name given; note that folder name is optional)
- `git push --set-upstream <remote> <branch>`: set the local branch to track the
remote branch
- `git fetch`: downloads new objects from the remote
- `git merge <branch>`: merges branch into current branch
- `git pull`: runs git fetch and then git merge
- `git stash`: temporarily remove current changes from the working directory
- `git stash pop`: add back temporarily removed changes to the working directory
